What Is Gum Disease: Gingivitis vs. Periodontitis

Gum disease, also known as periodontal disease, is inflammation caused by bacterial growth in the mouth around the tooth and along the gum line.

What Is Gum Disease? Gingivitis vs. Periodontitis
Oral health doesn’t stop at the teeth, you know. Gum care is just as important as dental care, but many people don’t fully understand the risks of gum disease, or how they can prevent it.

Gum disease, also known as periodontal disease, is inflammation caused by bacterial growth in the mouth around the tooth and along the gum line. Depending on the stage of disease, gum disease can be more precisely identified as gingivitis or periodontitis.

So what does gum disease look like? And what are the key difference between gingivitis and periodontitis? Keep reading for all you need to know about gum disease.

Key Differences Between Gum Disease, Gingivitis & Periodontitis
While the medical terminology around gum disease may be slightly confusing, it’s actually fairly simple: Gum disease is a general term used to describe all the stages of periodontal disease—including gingivitis and periodontitis.1

Gingivitis is an early, reversible stage of gum disease caused by plaque buildup on teeth.2 Plaque is mostly composed of bacteria, which can cause inflammation of the gums if not properly removed. In addition to inflammation, gingivitis symptoms can include swollen, puffy gums, reddening of gums, gums that bleed easily, tenderness, and bad breath.3

If gingivitis goes untreated, it can devolve into the more serious gum disease stage known as periodontitis, Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory condition that leads to mild, moderate, or severe destruction of supporting tissue around the teeth. Two main features of periodontitis are gum recession and bone loss around the affected teeth. Untreated, periodontitis can lead to the loosening or loss of teeth.4

Can Gum Disease Be Reversed?
That depends. Gingivitis can be treated and reversed, but the effects of periodontitis are typically irreversible. Periodontitis is a chronic, long-term condition that must be addressed with the help of a dental professional. For these reasons, it you are dealing with any form of gum disease, it’s essential to know which stage of gum disease you are experiencing in order to adapt the proper treatment plan.4

What Are the Stages of Gum Disease?
There are four general stages to gum disease:

Stage 1 – Gingivitis
Gingivitis is the earliest stage of gum disease, and is also the most common. The most frequent cause is poor or irregular tooth brushing, which allows plaque to remain on teeth. Clinically, tissue affected by gingivitis is characterized by swelling, redness, a shiny surface, and bleeding upon gentle probing. Still, gingivitis can go unnoticed, as it is commonly painless, and rarely generates spontaneous bleeding.2

Stage 2 – Early Periodontitis
If gingivitis goes untreated, bacteria in plaque can start to accumulate beneath the gums. During early periodontal disease, your gums may pull away from your teeth, forming pockets around them. Plaque and bacteria can then develop in these pockets, which are too deep to reach with a toothbrush or floss—meaning only a dental professional can treat the gum disease by this stage. This is early or mild periodontitis.5

Stage 3 – Moderate Periodontitis
If gum disease continues to go untreated, bacteria begin to erode the ligaments, soft tissues, and bone that hold your teeth in place. By this stage, you may begin to notice bad breath, pus around the gum line, and or pain.5

Stage 4 – Advanced Periodontitis
As periodontal disease continues to worsen, bone loss becomes more severe, which can cause teeth to become loose and eventually fall out. Advanced periodontitis can also cause teeth to shift position, start wobbling, or hurt when you chew. By this stage, extensive dental treatment is typically required to try to correct the damages of advanced periodontitis.1, 5

How to Prevent Gum Disease
Preventing gum disease is straightforward, and comes down to developing good, consistent oral health habits:

Brush your teeth with a fluoridated toothpaste at least twice a day

Floss at least once a day

Rinse with a mouthwash like LISTERINE® Clinical Solutions Gum Health Antiseptic Mouthwash for Gingivitis

Visit the dentist at least twice a year for preventative cleanings.4

Remember that prevention is more valuable than treatment, as once you enter the later stages of gum disease, it becomes irreversible. Do not ignore signs that may seem harmless, such as:

Bleeding gums when you floss or brush

Receding gums

Irritated gums that look red or swollen.

Additionally, risk factors like smoking, poor oral hygiene, diabetes, poor nutrition, and medication with oral side effects can all exacerbate early gum disease. Be sure to speak with a dental or medical professional on ways to manage these risk factors.4

How Is Gum Disease Treated?
If symptoms appear, make an appointment with your dentist to identify the causes of your disease, and to have your teeth and gums assessed. If pockets of bacteria have formed around the teeth, and gums are beginning to pull away from the teeth, your dentist will likely perform a deep cleaning to remove tartar and bacteria. They may also refer you to a periodontist, an oral health professional who specializes in the gums.4

Treatment for periodontitis might include:

Scaling and root-planing, a non-surgical form of deep cleaning of the affected tooth and root surfaces.

Prescription medication such as an oral rinse, topical medication, or antibiotics.

Surgical procedures for severe cases.4

Your dentist will likely review the key oral health habits with you, and may suggest specific toothpastes or mouthwashes, such as LISTERINE® Clinical Solutions Gum Health Antiseptic Mouthwash for Gingivitis.

Untreated, gum disease can develop into advanced stage periodontitis, the leading cause of tooth loss in the United States.5 But there is good news. When detected in the early gingivitis stage, gum disease is treatable, and can be prevented through proper care.